कदापि जन्मर्क्षदिने तव प्रभो निमन्त्रितज्ञातिवधूमहीसुरा ।
महानसस्त्वां सविधे निधाय सा महानसादौ ववृते व्रजेश्वरी ॥१॥
कदापि जन्म-ऋक्ष-दिने	once, on the birth star day
तव प्रभो	of Thee, O Lord!
निमन्त्रित-	having invited
ज्ञाति-वधू-महीसुरा:	relatives, their wives and Braahmins
महा-अनस:-त्वां सविधे	a big cart, Thee near it
निधाय सा	placing, she (Yashodaa)
महान-सादौ	in the kitchen
ववृते व्रजेश्वरी	got busy Yashoda
O Lord! Once on Thy birth star day, Yashoda, the queen of Vraja, who had invited the relatives and their wives and the Braahmins, for the occasion, placed Thee near a big cart and got busy in the kitchen organising the feast.
ततो भवत्त्राणनियुक्तबालकप्रभीतिसङ्क्रन्दनसङ्कुलारवै: ।
विमिश्रमश्रावि भवत्समीपत: परिस्फुटद्दारुचटच्चटारव: ॥२॥
तत: भवत्-	then, for Thy
त्राण-नियुक्त-	to protect appointed
बालक-प्रभीति-	the boys
सङ्क्रन्दन-	fearfully crying
सङ्कुला-रवै:	the confused voices
विमिश्रम्-अश्रावि	which were mingled (with) , were heard
भवत्-समीपत:	from near Thee
परिस्फुटत्-दारु-	cracking and breaking of wood
चटत्-चटा-रव:	with the crackling sound
Then from near Thee, was heard the fearful cries and confused voices of various boys who were appointed to protect Thee, which was mingled with the sound of the crackling and breaking sound of wood.
ततस्तदाकर्णनसम्भ्रमश्रमप्रकम्पिवक्षोजभरा व्रजाङ्गना: ।
भवन्तमन्तर्ददृशुस्समन्ततो विनिष्पतद्दारुणदारुमध्यगम् ॥३॥
तत:-तत्-आकर्णन-	then that hearing
सम्भ्रम-श्रम-	(with) the fear and the effort
प्रकम्पि-वक्षोज-भरा:	heaving with the heavy breasts
व्रजाङ्गना:	the Gopikas
भवन्तम्-अन्त:-ददृशु:-	Thee saw amongst
सम्न्तत: विनिष्पतत्-	all around strewn
दारुण-दारु-मध्यगम्	big pieces of wood, in the midst lying
Then hearing the terrific sound, frightened, the Gopikas came running with their heavy breasts heaving because of the effort and anxiety. They saw Thee lying amongst the frightful big pieces of broken wood strewn all around.
शिशोरहो किं किमभूदिति द्रुतं प्रधाव्य नन्द: पशुपाश्च भूसुरा: ।
भवन्तमालोक्य यशोदया धृतं समाश्वसन्नश्रुजलार्द्रलोचना: ॥४॥
शिशो:-अहो	to the child, Alas!
किं किम्-अभूत्-	what! What has happened
इति द्रुतं प्रधाव्य	thus (saying),swiftly running
नन्द: पशुपा:-च	Nanda Gopa, the cowherds
भूसुरा: भवन्तम्-आलोक्य	and the Braahmins, Thee seeing
यशोदया धृतं	(who was) by Yashoda held
समाश्वसन्-	felt relieved
अश्रु-जल-आर्द्र-लोचना:	(with) eyes wet with tears (of joy)
Alas! What! What has happened to the child!' thus crying, Nanda, the Gopas and the assembled Braahmins rushed to the spot. Finding Thee in Yashoda's arms, they felt relieved and shed tears of joy seeing that the child was safe.
कस्को नु कौतस्कुत एष विस्मयो विशङ्कटं यच्छकटं विपाटितम् ।
न कारणं किञ्चिदिहेति ते स्थिता: स्वनासिकादत्तकरास्त्वदीक्षका: ॥५॥
क:-क: नु कौत:-कुत:	what! What, indeed how? Where? (did it happen)
एष विस्मय: विशङ्कटम्	this is a wonder, this huge
यत्-शकटम् विपाटितम्	that (this) cart is shattered to pieces
न कारणम्	no reason
किञ्चित्-इह-इति	at all is here, thus
ते स्थिता:	they stood
स्व-नासिका-दत्त-करा:-	on their noses placing their hands
त्वत्-ईक्षका:	at Thee looking
What ! What happened and how! This is a wonder! This huge cart is shattered! There seems to be no explanation for this', thus exclaiming, they looked at Thee, awestricken, with their fingers placed on their noses.
कुमारकस्यास्य पयोधरार्थिन: प्ररोदने लोलपदाम्बुजाहतम् ।
मया मया दृष्टमनो विपर्यगादितीश ते पालकबालका जगु: ॥६॥
कुमारकस्य-अस्य	of this child
पयोधर-अर्थिन:	of being breast fed desirous
प्ररोदने	while crying
लोल-पद-अम्बुज-	by the movement of the lotus like legs
आहतम्	was hit (the cart)
मया मया दृष्टम्-	I saw, I saw
अन: विपर्यगात्-	the cart overturned
इति-ईश	thus O Lord
ते पालक-बालका:	the children who were guarding Thee
जगु:	said
O Lord! The children who were guarding Thee, declared 'This child who was desirous of being breast fed, moved his lotus like legs, and hit the cart which overturned. I saw, even I saw.'
भिया तदा किञ्चिदजानतामिदं कुमारकाणामतिदुर्घटं वच: ।
भवत्प्रभावाविदुरैरितीरितं मनागिवाशङ्क्यत दृष्टपूतनै: ॥७॥
भिया तदा	out of fright , then
किञ्चित्-अजानताम्-	anything those who did not know (to them)
इदम् कुमारकाणाम्-	the children's
अति-दुर्घटम् वच:	(this was) a very improbable statement
भवत्-प्रभाव-अविदुरै:-	Thy prowess' those not knowing
इति-ईरितं मनाक्-इव-	this statement, a little bit
अशङ्क्यत दृष्ट-पूतनै:	was feared (to be true), who had witnessed (the incident of) Pootanaa
Then to the people who knew nothing of Thy prowess, the words of the frightened children were entirely baseless. But to those who knew of even a bit of Thy prowess and had witnessed the incident of Pootanaa, could not reject their statement altogether.
प्रवालताम्रं किमिदं पदं क्षतं सरोजरम्यौ नु करौ विरोजितौ।
इति प्रसर्पत्करुणातरङ्गितास्त्वदङ्गमापस्पृशुरङ्गनाजना: ॥८॥
प्रवाल-ताम्रं	tender leaves like pink
किम्-इदं पदं क्षतं	is this (little) foot hurt
सरोज-रम्यौ नु	lotuses like charming indeed
करौ विरोजितौ	(these) hands, have (they) been hurt
इति प्रसर्पत्-करुणा-	thus with overflowing sympathy
तरङ्गिता:-त्वत्-अङ्गम्-	moved by (such concern), Thy body
आपस्पृशु:-अङ्गनाजना:	stroked gently, the women folk
Pink like tender leaves, these legs, have they been hurt? These hands, charming like the lotuses, have they been injured?' Thus with overflowing sympathy and moved with such concern, the women folk stroked Thy body gently.
अये सुतं देहि जगत्पते: कृपातरङ्गपातात्परिपातमद्य मे ।
इति स्म सङ्गृह्य पिता त्वदङ्गकं मुहुर्मुहु: श्लिष्यति जातकण्टक: ॥९॥
अये सुतं देहि	O (Yashoda) give (me) my son
जगत्पते: कृपातरङ्ग-पातात्-	by the Lord's showers of mercy
परिपातम्-अद्य मे	(was) saved , today, my son
इति स्म सङ्गृह्य	thus collecting
पिता त्वत्-अङ्गकम्	(Thy) father , Thy body
मुहु:-मुहु: श्लिष्यति	again and again embraces
जात-कण्टक:	with his body full of horripilation
O Yashoda! Give me my son. By the Lord's showers of mercy today my son was saved!' Thus saying and collecting Thee in his arms, Thy father embraced Thee again and again, whose body was full of horripilation.
अनोनिलीन: किल हन्तुमागत: सुरारिरेवं भवता विहिंसित: ।
रजोऽपि नो दृष्टममुष्य तत्कथं स शुद्धसत्त्वे त्वयि लीनवान् ध्रुवम् ॥१०॥
अन:-निलीन:	as a cart, disguised
किल हन्तुम्-आगत:	indeed, to kill, had come
सुरारि:-एवं	the Asura, was thus
भवता विहिंसित:	by Thee was killed
रज:-अपि न: दृष्टम्-अमुष्य	even a speck of him (of Rajo Guna) was not seen
तत्-कथं स	how can it be that he
शुद्ध-सत्वे त्वयि	who are pure Sattva, in Thee
लीनवान् ध्रुवम्	merged certainly
The Asura who had come to kill Thee, disguised as a cart, was destroyed by Thee. But even a trace of his body or evil nature (Rajas) was not seen. How can that be? Certainly, he became pure (by coming in contact with Thee) and merged in Thy pure Sattvic Self.
प्रपूजितैस्तत्र ततो द्विजातिभिर्विशेषतो लम्भितमङ्गलाशिष: ।
व्रजं निजैर्बाल्यरसैर्विमोहयन् मरुत्पुराधीश रुजां जहीहि मे ॥११॥
प्रपूजितै:-तत्र	well honoured there
तत: द्विजातिभि:-	then by the Braahamins
विशेषत:	specially
लम्भित-मङ्गल-आशिष:	conferred with auspicious blessings
व्रजं	Gokul
निजै:-बाल्य-रसै:-	with Thy childish sweet ways
विमोहयन्	captivating (delighting)
मरुत्पुराधीश	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
रुजां जहीहि मे	suffering, sheer away, mine
The Braahmins who were invited and were well honoured specially conferred their auspicious blessings on Thee. With Thy captivating childish sweet ways, Thou delighted the whole of Vraja. O Lord of Guruvaayur! May Thou sheer away my sufferings.